Okay, welcome to functional architecture.
I'm Brian Lonsdorf, I'll be your teacher.
And we're gonna learn about architecture
and functional programming today.
So, there's this issue with
teaching architecture.
Its always happens where you
try to teach architecture and
it's gonna have all these benefits.
But you can't actually show them in the
class when you're teaching it because you
want the examples to be simple enough
to consume and understand in a day.
And architecture really only pays off
once you hit this kind of breaking point.
There's enough complexity and
your app gets big enough.
So we're gonna try to balance
that line and look at how we can
apply this architecture to get benefits
once the app gets kind of big enough.
So, what is our goal?
Why, why are we doing this?
Do we want our apps to be more modular or
the, do we need them to be more extensible
or performance or maintainable?
Each app has a different kind of set
of values that you wanna go after.
And so for our compass today and
in general I think, we can establish
a good goal for functional
architecture that you start with.
And as you have different requirements,
you can focus on different goals.
So what is that goal?
What can we do here?
Let's just take a step back and
look at this code.
It's a long procedure,
you don't have to read it.
But what we're really doing when we do
architecture is we just kind of group
things.
And then we give them a name.
So we have these named
procedures that we've grouped.
And then we group those procedures
with names into more groups,
and we call this modulars,
modules or classes.
And then those get names.
And then we have datatypes.
And we group data into
these little bundles.
And then we give those names.
We have names on tops of names on tops
of names, this giant cloud of names.
Thank you to Joe Nelson for the slide.
Just wanna call that out.
So, Domain Driven Design is a great book.
It really, really tells you how coding
by metaphor and using these names and
really getting into the zone
of of using ubiquitous,
ubiquitous language to
model the real world.
And really, really hammering on that until
you distill it into the perfect metaphors.
And we kind of have a problem
with metaphors here.
One you have to know about the domain and
context.
You can't just jump into an app.
You have to know everything about what's
not in the code itself to understand
the code.
And then we end up with like these
things like processor and converter.
That's not real world,
like raise your hand if you've
ever written a processor class.
So you're, you end up with these
mixed metaphors of computer stuff and
real world stuff and
things evolve over time and blur and
you end up with this
hodgepodge of functionality.
There's all kind of grouped by name, but
the functionality may be
grouped in different ways.
So, right off the bat,
if we're gonna be capturing procedures for
reuse and we're just depending on a name,
we don't know what we can do with that,
really, there's no actual
rules of composition.
If we're planning on recomposing this
after grouping it and naming it,
we don't know if we can
run it more than once.
Can we run it in different orders?
is it changing other parts of our program?
How does it interact?
So these things that we
are actually defining don't really
become knowledge in our program.
So we want to focus on these
properties here, right?
Whenever we develop a stored procedure,
we want to have properties
around composition.
After all, we're reusing these things.
We're gonna be composing them
in different situations.
And these laws are what protect us from
just the confusion of the name alone.
So our first goal is to
find functions with defined
contracts,mainly those
mathematical properties.
So we are gonna look at
this class ,that's user and
we have a full name here.,and
yhis is perfect, right?
We have a full name function,
works just fine.
We have Bobby Fischer, comes right out.
So, another thing we're gonna do here is
try to break this down and generalize it.
Let's see how that process works.
So we have a user type and
a full name function.
And here we're joining the same
thing as the class effectively.
And it ends up with the same result.
But what if we generalize it further,
I mean, we're just passing first name and
last name.
Why don't we create a join
with spaces function?
We don't have to call it first or
last name, and
ends up being the same exact function,
but it's much more generic and reusable.
And look, we have properties,
it's associative.
Turns out, we can call
jonWithSpace in any nested order.
As long as it's all called,
it doesn't matter how we associate the
parentheses, that's what associated means.
And that's a composable contract for
this generic function.
I'm gonna hammer on generic functions for
a little while longer.
Here with joinWithSpaces, we could take
it a step further and call it joinable.
We'll take any joinable and called join
on it and then we'll pass in the array.
And literally,
there's nothing joinWithSpaces can do
other than call join, because it
knows nothing about its data type.
So by generalizing, we're making less
possibility, simpler implementations,
more reuse, and it becomes a more
generic generalized function.
And we actually gather what
we recover encapsulation.
Objects give us encapsulation
through information hiding, but
this effectively is information hiding.
If we only know we can
call join on our objects,
we know nothing else about it,
we're hiding information.
And we can take that to its logical end
and just define this identity function.
And this identity function,
it knows nothing of this a,
it's just gonna take an a and return an a.
And if it called anything on it or
did anything to it, I mean,
it would break that contract of taking
anything at all and returning it back.
So by not knowing anything about this and
generalizing it to its logical end,
as much as we can make it general, we're
actually doing information hiding and
protecting ourselves from rippling
changes across our application.